1. Climate change, ecosystems and smallholder agriculture in Central America: an introduction to the special issue:
Central America is one of the regions most exposed to climate change (Giorgi 2006). A narrow isthmus between the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea, it is strongly affected by droughts, hurricanes and the El Niño-southern oscillation (ENSO) phenomena (CEPAL 2011). As a result, three countries in the region rank in the top 10 of the Global Climate Risk Index (Kreft and Eckstien 2013) based on the impacts of extreme weather events between 1993 and 2012. Much of the regional economy is based on agriculture. In Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, more than two thirds of the population depends on agriculture. This agricultural base is often intimately tied to ecosystems, especially in diverse farming systems of smallholders. But it is increasingly threatened by climate variability and change (Bouroncle et al. 2016; Baca et al. 2014), which are inducing changes in areas suitable for crops and leading to high yield variability. Storms, floods and droughts have had the greatest impacts on agriculture in Central America over the last century (Guha-Sapir et al. 2014). This special issue addresses the adaptation challenges facing smallholders, ecosystems and ecosystem services in the region. In this introduction, we review the literature on regional climate and its drivers, climate change projections, impacts on agriculture and ecosystems, and information management for adaptation in the region. Short descriptions of the special issue contributions are provided throughout the text.

2. Smallholder farmers’ attitudes and determinants of adaptation to climate risks in East Africa:
Adapting to climate risks is central to the goal of increasing food security and enhancing resilience of farming systems in East Africa. We examined farmers’ attitudes and assessed determinants of adaptation using data from a random sample of 500 households in Borana, Ethiopia; Nyando, Kenya; Hoima, Uganda; and Lushoto, Tanzania. Adaptation was measured using a livelihood-based index that assigned weights to different individual strategies based on their marginal contributions to a household’s livelihood. Results showed that farmers’ attitudes across the four sites strongly favored introduction of new crops, changes in crop varieties, and changes in planting times. Farmers disfavored soil, land, and water management practices. At lower levels of adaptation (25% quantile), adaptation index correlated positively with membership to farmers’ groups, household size, sex of the household head, and number of months of food shortage. Farmer group membership enhanced adaptation at intermediate (50% quantile) level whereas access to credit increased adaptation at high (75% quantile) level. Food insecurity, however, correlated negatively with the likelihood to choose individual adaptation strategies suggesting that although households adapted to improve food security status of their households, hunger was a barrier to adaptation. Our findings suggest that providing climate information to inform timely planting, promoting crop diversification, and encouraging adoption of adapted varieties of crops might be successful to enhancing resilience of farming systems in the short-term. In the long-term, increased investment in reducing hunger, encouraging groups formation, and easing liquidity constraints will be required to promote adaptation through implementation of soil, water, and land management strategies.
In many countries of sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), farmers are vulnerable to risks in agriculture (both climate and non-climate related), including pest and disease outbreaks, extreme weather events, and market shocks, among others, making it difficult to eradicate poverty and compromising the ability to achieve food security (Hertel and Rosch, 2010; McDowell and Hess, 2012; Thornton et al., 2008). Climate change is expected to disproportionately affect smallholder farmers by further exacerbating the risks that they face (Harvey et al., 2014). In recent years, East Africa has experienced frequent episodes of both excessive (Webster et al., 1999; Latif et al., 1999) and deficient rainfall (Hastenrath et al., 2007; Williams and Funk, 2011; Nicholson, 2015), and an increase in seasonal mean temperature (Funk et al., in press). For example, there has been an increase in floods from an average of less than one event per year in the 1980s to seven events per year between 2000 and 2006 (Shongwe et al., 2011). Aridity has increased substantially over Africa since the 1970s (Dai, 2011; Nicholson, 2015).

Impacts of climate risks on farming systems and livelihoods of rural populations have been identified. Changes in optimal growth conditions for crops and increases in pest incidences are projected to lower yields (Hisali and Kasirye, 2008; Thornton et al., 2010; Rowhani et al., 2011; Lybbert and Sumner, 2012; Jarvis et al., 2012; Waha et al., 2012). Crop revenue is expected to decline (Kabubo-Mariara and Karanja, 2007) and food security is projected to reduce (Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994; Parry et al., 2005; Schlenker and Lobell, 2010). Yet the agriculture sector is expected to significantly contribute to reduction of poverty and achievement of sustainable development goals (SDGs).

Adaptation is important to address the adverse impacts of climate risks. Food security can be increased with adaptation (Di Falco et al., 2011; Lybbert and Sumner, 2012; Di Falco and Veronesi, 2013; Di Falco, 2014). Adaptation refers to adjustments in human–environmental systems in response to observed or expected changes in climatic stimuli (Below et al., 2012; Wheeler et al., 2013). Park et al. (2012) differentiated between incremental and transformational adaptation. The former is characterized by continued response to climatic risks within an existing system whereas the latter is a process that results in change in the biophysical, social, or economic components of a system (Park et al., 2012). Here, we focus on incremental adaptation.

Farming practices such as crop, soil, land, and water management technologies are important adaptation strategies but implementation remains low, especially in SSA (Deressa et al., 2009; Kurukulasuriya et al., 2006; Seo and Mendelsohn, 2008; Hassan and Nhemachena, 2008; Di Falco et al., 2011; Bryan et al., 2009, 2013). In this study, we argue that farmers differ in their ability to implement adaptation strategies and that pecuniary and non-pecuniary costs affect human behavior (Kaiser et al., 2010). Differences in farmers’ abilities and costs of implementing farming practices can be useful to transitively rank adaptation strategies in terms of what is feasible and in what context. Such an approach can further provide insights on the practices that farmers favor or disfavor depending on the specific context and is, therefore, important to understanding farmers’ attitudes towards adaptation strategies to climate risks. To date, however, it is not well known how different adaptation strategies rank in specific-contexts based on the cost of implementation and farmers’ behavioral dispositions. This has made it difficult to promote targeted interventions and partly explains why farmers might perceive climate variability but fail to engage in adaptation strategies (Smit et al., 1996; Bryan et al., 2009; Gbetibouo et al., 2010; Fosu-Mensah et al., 2012).

The objectives of this study were: 1) to examine farmers’ attitude towards adaptation strategies to climate risks; and 2) to identify determinants of adaptation to climate risks. For the first objective, we use a psychometric latent class Rasch model of attitude measurement. This approach has been found useful in studies related to adoption of integrated soil fertility management (Lagerkvist et al., 2015), consumer behavior (Salzberger et al., 2014), and healthy eating habits (Henson et al., 2010). However, it has not yet been applied within climate change literature. For the second objective, regression analysis is applied to identify socioeconomic determinants of adaptation to climate risks.

3. A fuzzy logic slope-form system for predictive soil mapping of a landscape-scale area with strong relief conditions:
We studied an improved slope form system using a fuzzy logic method to assess and map soil fertility of a mountain region in northern Vietnam that has strong relief conditions. The lack of good soil mapping techniques in Vietnam has brought about insufficient soil information, which often leads to false recommendations for land use and crop planning. The reviewed literature describes soil-mapping techniques using fuzzy logic method, but all of them are applied for mapping areas that have gentle relief conditions that are unlikely to be applicable to the mountainous soils in our study area. In this paper, we introduce a detailed slope form system that significantly describes the complexity of terrain characteristics of the area to be mapped, and provides more detail about the variability of the soil fertility of the area. Nine basic slopeforms were used to characterize for each of upper-, middle-, and foot slope positions, making the list 27 slopeforms. Together with crest and valley, the total unit number is 29. We investigated soils of the area and classified them into the major soil groups and calculated soil property indices for all of them. We identified four major environmental parameters affecting soil formation and soil quality: geology, elevation, slope inclination and land use. The findings indicated that soil fertility differs at slope positions. Soils located at upper slope positions, where agricultural activity only started recently, are more fertile than those found at middle slope positions. Soils located at foot slope positions, where eroded sediments accumulate, also have high levels of fertility compared to those on the middle slope. The improved slope form system then became an important additional environmental parameter for this soil mapping work. At a same comparable category, i.e. slope position, geology, soil group, elevation, slope gradient, straight slopeforms are an indicator for better soil fertility compared to convex and concave forms. Although the findings could not specify soil fertility variability for all 29 slopeforms, they did emphasize the major differences in soil fertility and soil formation based on three major forms of convex, straight and concave, with other factors taken into account, such as slope inclination, geology and elevation. We expect our results to be used by scientists and local authorities in deriving more effective land use and crop options for land use management strategies for the northern Vietnam's mountain regions.

4. Permits vs. offsets under investment uncertainty
This paper investigates interaction effects between permit and offset schemes, using the framework on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) as a test bed for evaluating the cost and benefit of including low-cost offsets in mandatory emission trading schemes. We use a real options model of firm-level investment decisions under stochastic prices to compare alternative emission trading and permit-offset linkage schemes. By isolating the critical design factors that drive energy investments, we seek to identify policy regimes that balance the different concerns in the polarized debate for and against the inclusion of offsets. Our findings indicate that a moderate offset quota is sufficient to contain investment crowding-out effects, while it still has a positive effect on profit distributions. In contrast, the classical permit price collar will not effectively change investment behavior, precisely because in a framework with multiple compliance instruments the volatility of cheaper offsets is the driving force for investment. Under these conditions, a price collar for offsets emerges as a largely overlooked policy option to foster investment incentives. A combination of offset quota and offset price collar leads to investment patterns that are almost identical to a regime without access to offsets.

5. Potential trajectories of old-growth Neotropical forest functional composition under climate change:
Quantifying relationships between plant functional traits and abiotic gradients is valuable for evaluating potential responses of forest communities to climate change. However, the trajectories of change expected to occur in tropical forest functional characteristics as a function of future climate variation are largely unknown. We modeled community level trait values of Costa Rican rain forests as a function of current and future climate, and quantified potential changes in functional composition. We calculated per-plot community weighted mean (CWM) trait values for leaf area (LA), specific leaf area (SLA), leaf dry matter content (LDMC), leaf nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) content, and wood basic specific gravity (WSG), for tree and palm species in 127 0.25 ha plots. We modeled the response of CWM traits to current temperature and precipitation gradients using generalized additive modeling. We then predicted and mapped CWM traits values under current and future climate, and quantified potential changes under a global warming scenario (RCP8.5, year 2050). We calculated the area within the multi trait functional space occupied by forest plots under both current and future climate, and determined potential changes in functional space occupied by forest plots. Overall, precipitation predicted CWM traits better than temperature. Models indicated increases in CWM SLA, N and P, and a decrease in CWM LDMC under climate change. Lowland forest communities converged on a single direction of change towards more acquisitive CWM trait values, indicating a change in forest functional composition resulting from a changed climate. Functional space occupied by forest plots was reduced by 50% under the future climate. Functional composition changes may have further effects on forests ecosystem services. Assessing functional trait spatial-gradients can help bridge the gap between species-based biogeography and biogeochemical approaches to strengthen biodiversity and ecosystem services conservation efforts.

6. Agrobiodiversity and a sustainable food future:
The biodiversity of food plants is vital for humanity's capacity to meet sustainability challenges. This goal requires the rigorous integration of plant, environmental, social and health sciences. It is coalescing around four thematic cornerstones that are both interdisciplinary and policy relevant.

7. Value chain development in Vietnam: a look at approaches used and options for improved impact:
Despite the widespread use of value chain development (VCD) approaches to poverty reduction, there has been limited debate on how VCD is implemented in the field, from the approaches, methods, and tools used, to the investments and partnerships made. The article presents five case studies: tea, dairy, horticulture, cinnamon, and fish in Vietnam. For each case, we conducted interviews with development agencies, producer organizations, and principal buyers. The cases examined how VCD interventions were designed, the role of different stakeholders in the implementation process, and the challenges faced by practitioners and chain actors to achieve impact at scale. Results suggest that VCD interventions tended to focus on supporting smallholder participation in high-value, fast-growing markets, but based on a narrow set of activities, mainly around upgrading smallholder production capacities and establishing producer associations. Overall, collaboration with downstream buyers and service providers was muted and, in a few cases, non-existent. Opportunities for increased impact exist based on increased collaboration between practitioners and researchers to employ VCD tools in specific contexts, as well as to design new tools for addressing specific needs and facilitate joint learning on the implementation process and related outcomes. The findings also suggest a need for dedicated approaches to supporting producer organizations, given their central role in the implementation of VCD interventions.

8. Maximizing farm-level uptake and diffusion of biological control innovations in today’s digital era:
When anthropologists interviewed Honduran and Nepali smallholders in the mid-1990s, they were told that “Insects are a terrible mistake in God’s creation” and “There’s nothing that kills them, except for insecticides”. Even growers who maintained a close bond with nature were either entirely unaware of natural pest control, or expressed doubt about the actual value of these services on their farm. Farmers’ knowledge, beliefs and attitudes towards pests and natural enemies are of paramount importance to the practice of biological control, but are all too often disregarded. In this study, we conduct a retrospective analysis of the extent to which social science facets have been incorporated into biological control research over the past 25 years. Next, we critically examine various biological control forms, concepts and technologies using a ‘diffusion of innovations’ framework, and identify elements that hamper their diffusion and farm-level uptake. Lastly, we introduce effective observation-based learning strategies, such as farmer field schools to promote biological control, and list how those participatory approaches can be further enriched with information and communication technologies (ICT). Although biological control scientists have made substantial technological progress and generate nearly 1000 papers annually, only a fraction (1.4%) of those address social science or technology transfer aspects. To ease obstacles to enhanced farmer learning about biological control, we describe ways to communicate biological control concepts and technologies for four divergent agricultural knowledge systems (as identified within a matrix built around ‘cultural importance’ and ‘ease of observation’). Furthermore, we describe how biological control innovations suffer a number of notable shortcomings that hamper their farm-level adoption and subsequent diffusion, and point at ways to remediate those by tactical communication campaigns or customized, (ICT-based) adult education programs. Amongst others, we outline how video, smart phones, or tablets can be used to convey key ecological concepts and biocontrol technologies, and facilitate social learning. In today’s digital era, cross-disciplinary science and deliberate multi-stakeholder engagement will provide biocontrol advocates the necessary means to bolster farmer adoption rates, counter-act surging insecticide use, and restore public trust in one of nature’s prime services.

9. Survey data of intra-household decision making and smallholder agricultural production in Northern Uganda and Southern Tanzania:
This article provides a description of intra-household survey data that were collected in Uganda and Tanzania in 2014 and 2015, respectively. The surveys were implemented using a structured questionnaire administered among 585 households in Uganda and 608 in Tanzania. Information on decision making processes in agricultural production was collected from the principal adult male and female decision-makers in each household. The survey consisted of two parts. Firstly, the decision-makers, both male and female of each household were jointly interviewed. Secondly, individual interviews were carried out, questioning the decision-makers separately. The datasets include both household and individual level data containing numeric, categorical and string variables. The datasets have been shared publicly on the Harvard dataverse.

10. Application of thermography for monitoring stomatal conductance of Coffea arabica under different shading systems:

Stomatal regulation is a key process in the physiology of Coffea arabica (C. arabica). Intrinsically linked to photosynthesis and water relations, it provides insights into the plant's adaptive capacity, survival and growth. The ability to rapidly quantify this parameter for C. arabica under different agroecological systems would be an indispensable tool. Using a Flir E6 MIR Camera, an index that is equivalent to stomatal conductance (Ig) was compared with stomatal conductance measurements (gs) in a mature coffee plantation. In order to account for varying meteorological conditions between days, the methods were also compared under stable meteorological conditions in a laboratory and Ig was also converted to absolute stomatal conductance values (g1). In contrast to typical plant-thermography methods which measure indices once per day over an extended time period, we used high resolution hourly measurements over daily time series with 9 sun and 9 shade replicates. Eight daily time series showed a strong correlation between methods, while the remaining 10 were not significant. Including several other meteorological parameters in the calculation of g1 did not contribute to any stronger correlation between methods. Total pooled data (combined daily series) resulted in a correlation of ? = 0.66 (P ? 2.2e ? 16), indicating that our approach is particularly useful for situations where absolute values of stomatal conductance are not required, such as for comparative purposes, screening or trend analysis. We use the findings to advance the protocol for a more accurate methodology which may assist in quantifying advantageous microenvironment designs for coffee, considering the current and future climates of coffee growing regions.
The coffee industry supports an estimated 125 million people worldwide, with the vast majority of farmers located in Africa (Pendergrast, 2010; ICO, 2015). However, several areas are approaching, or have surpassed the suitable environmental growing limits of C. arabica, thus compromising yield quantity (Craparo et al., 2015), with modelling projections depicting further losses (Bunn et al., 2014, 2015; Moat et al., 2017). Furthermore, depending on the cropping system, certain variables (shade, sunlight, altitude) may either ameliorate or exacerbate the effects of climate change on the crop (Bertrand et al., 2016). The design structure of the microenvironment is therefore fundamental for climate change adaptation. These decisions will also have other important consequences for aspects such as climate change mitigation, ecosystem services and livelihood security (Vaast et al., 2006; Lin, 2010; Jha and Dick, 2010). Gaining rapid insights into the status of the plant's condition in different environments is thus a crucial tool, especially in light of future climate projections and the need for effective site-specific adaptation strategies (Bunn et al., 2014, 2015; Craparo et al., 2015; Läderach et al., 2016).

Leaf stomata allow the plant to rapidly adapt to changing biotic and abiotic stimuli (Chaves et al., 2003). By regulating leaf gas exchange fluxes (CO2 and H2O), stomata are responsible for maintaining equilibrium in the plant. There is a constant compromise between maximizing photosynthetic gains, while minimizing water loss (Jones, 2014). A byproduct of these fluxes is the regulation of canopy temperature (Tcanopy). As stomata open, water loss occurs through leaf transpiration which consequently cools the plant. However, under sub-optimal conditions such as soil water deficit, high vapour pressure deficit (VPD) or high irradiance, transpiration may cease, thereby resulting in an increase in leaf temperature (Tleaf) (Hetherington and Woodward, 2003). Monitoring stomatal conductance to water vapour (gs) and/or transpiration, provides insights into the plants' interaction with the immediate microenvironment. However, typical methods such as leaf gas exchange measurements or porometry are not without limitations. These methods require contact with the leaf, which often interferes with leaf functioning, and are also limited in their ability to capture spatial and temporal variability at the plant canopy level (Costa et al., 2013). Individual leaf measurements are also time consuming depending on sample size (Struthers et al., 2015).

Thermal imaging (thermography) is a rapid and effective technique used to remotely measure stomatal parameters (Jones et al., 2009). Using the variability in Tcanopy, thermography makes it possible to estimate gs and transpiration. With recent advances in sensor affordability and improved methodology, the technique has been successfully applied on a variety of annual and perennial plant species across diverse environments (e.g. Jones et al., 2009; Durigon and de Jong van Lier, 2013; Ballester et al., 2014; Struthers et al., 2015; Maes et al., 2016). The inherent nature of thermography means it can be applied to almost any spatial and temporal scale, from seedlings in laboratories to individual leaves, plant canopies and entire field crops (Jones et al., 2009). The technique has therefore been successfully used to investigate several phenomena such as abnormal stomatal closure, genetic variation in stress tolerance and the influence of different management techniques on plant water status and phenotyping (Costa et al., 2013).

As leaf temperature is influenced by environmental conditions such as air temperature, wind speed, humidity and incident radiation, a number of attempts have been made to normalize the data to account for varying environmental conditions (Jones et al., 2009). For instance, Jackson et al. (1977) used differences between air temperature (Ta) and Tleaf as a measure of plant stress. Further to this, Idso et al. (1981) developed the ‘Crop Water Stress Index’ (CWSI) which relates the observed temperature to the minimum (non-stressed) and maximum (non-transpiring) temperatures of a reference crop under similar environmental conditions. However, a limitation when using this index is that it requires the user to determine temperature baselines for the specific well-watered crop and VPD at each measurement (Costa et al., 2013). In addition, this index does not factor in changes in Tcanopy due to irradiance and wind speed, and the baselines may change with different radiation conditions (Costa et al., 2013).

Building upon this index, Jones (1999) developed an alternative approach which uses physical wet and dry reference surfaces, mitigating the downfalls of the original CWSI. More specifically, as the references are within the same environment as the crop in question, there is no need for the theoretical estimation of baselines as they will be exposed to the same conditions (VPD, wind speed, radiation) as the canopy of interest at the time of measurement (Costa et al., 2013). Temperatures for the baselines are easily obtained in each image, either by using artificial reference surfaces (Grant et al., 2016; Maes et al., 2016), or by spraying leaves with water to replicate a fully transpiring leaf (Twet) and covering with petroleum jelly to artificially close stomata (Tdry). Another useful index which can be calculated from these parameters is the thermal index of relative stomatal conductance (Ig) (Jones, 1999). Unlike the CWSI, Ig is linearly proportional to gs, but only for a constant boundary layer conductance (Jones et al., 2009). In order to derive absolute values of stomatal conductance from Ig, it is necessary to account for variability in wind speed (u) and Ta.

Considering the potential benefits of thermography in current coffee agroecological research, the objective of this study is to investigate the applicability of this method as an alternative or complementary technique to quantify stomatal conductance of C. arabica. We aim to outline successful methods for determining Ig of coffee in the field, under two shading systems. In order to gain the most accurate understanding of the relationship between Ig and gs, the focus of this study is the association at the leaf level over highly variable (hourly) time series. Due to fluctuating meteorological conditions in the field, the same methodology was repeated in the laboratory under stable meteorological conditions. Furthermore, Ig was also converted to absolute stomatal conductance g1, using a scaling factor which accounts for the variability in boundary layer conductance (G) and temperature. We discuss important findings which may assist in advancing the protocol for canopy and plantation level analysis on coffee. Finally, the novelty of this method for determining the influence of different agroecological systems on coffee and under future climate scenarios is presented.

11. Phytoplasma infection of a tropical root crop triggers bottom-up cascades by favoring generalist over specialist herbivores:
Global interest on plant-microbe-insect interactions is rapidly growing, revealing the multiple ways in which microorganisms mediate plant-herbivore interactions. Phytopathogens regularly alter whole repertoires of plant phenotypic traits, and bring about shifts in key chemical or morphological characteristics of plant hosts. Pathogens can also cause cascading effects on higher trophic levels, and eventually shape entire plant-associated arthropod communities. We tested the hypothesis that a Candidatus Phytoplasma causing cassava witches’ broom (CWB) on cassava (Manihot esculenta Grantz) is altering species composition of invasive herbivores and their associated parasitic hymenopterans. We conducted observational studies in cassava fields in eastern Cambodia to assess the effect of CWB infection on abundance of specialist and generalist mealybugs (Homoptera: Pseudococcidae), and associated primary and hyper-parasitoid species. CWB infection positively affects overall mealybug abundance and species richness at a plant- and field-level, and disproportionately favors a generalist mealybug over a specialist feeder. CWB phytoplasma infection led to increased parasitoid richness and diversity, with richness of ‘comparative’ specialist taxa being the most significantly affected. Parasitism rate did not differ among infected and uninfected plants, and mealybug host suppression was not impacted. CWB phytoplasma modifies host plant quality for sap-feeding homopterans, differentially affects success rates of two invasive species, and generates niche opportunities for higher trophic orders. By doing so, a Candidatus phytoplasma affects broader food web structure and functioning, and assumes the role of an ecosystem engineer. Our work unveils key facets of phytoplasma ecology, and sheds light upon complex multi-trophic interactions mediated by an emerging phytopathogen. These findings have further implications for invasion ecology and management.
In their natural environment, plants face concurrent and successive exposure to a variety of attackers, including insect herbivores, viruses, bacteria and fungi [1]. While single plant-antagonist combinations have been fairly well described, the dynamics of plant-herbivore interactions under multiple attack have only recently caught scientists’ attention [2,3]. Nevertheless, these plant-microbe-insect (PMI) interactions can have far-reaching impacts at multiple levels of biological organization, and may shape the composition and function of entire trophic communities [4]. Pathogen-mediated interactions should therefore preferably be assessed within the community context and examined through the lens of multi-trophic ecology [3,5,6].

Co-occurring antagonists can differentially affect defense signaling pathways and subsequently shape a plant’s volatile emissions or modify colonization and foraging patterns by plant-associated arthropods [2,7,8]. In addition to affecting herbivores, systemically-induced plant defenses and semiochemical release can also have major implications for higher trophic levels [9]. Furthermore, plant-microbe-insect interactions can affect the overall plant phenotype and alter the chemical, morphological and physiological traits of plants [10,11]. Pathogen-infected plants can also have vastly different color, architecture or micro-climate conditions [12], any of which could affect plant-herbivore interactions. Herbivore morphology, life history, fitness, and behavior can be impacted by plant quality, with cascading effects on natural enemies such as parasitoids and predators [13,14,15,16], thus affecting the composition, structure, and function of entire arthropod communities [3]. Lastly, pathogen-mediated effects tend to be highly species-specific and context-dependent, and can vary greatly among herbivores within the same feeding guild or family [17].

Although a rapidly growing body of literature covers the many intricate ways in which viral pathogens modulate host-vector interactions, the effect of other classes of plant pathogens is less well studied [18,19]. Examples from certain pathosystems show that bacterial and fungal pathogens often have subtle indirect impacts on herbivores and higher trophic levels. For example, mildew-infected plants are less attractive to the braconid parasitoid Cotesia glomerata, and pierid caterpillars on those plants have lower levels of parasitisation [20]. Also, citrus trees infected by the bacterium, Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus have altered volatile blends and plant nutrient profiles that subsequently modify host choice, mate selection and movement patterns of the psyllid vector Diaphorina citri [21,22]. At present, it is widely accepted that phytopathogenic fungi or bacteria modulate populations of their vectors as much as non-vector herbivores, but the effect at higher trophic levels is yet to be fully understood [6].

One group of vector-borne bacterial pathogens that has received virtually no attention from a community ecology perspective are Candidatus Phytoplasma spp. [3]. Phytoplasma are phloem-limited bacteria that modify plant hormone balance and cause dramatic alterations in plant morphology, including extensive leaf proliferation, and creation of pseudo-flowers or witches’ broom symptoms [23]. These distinct plant morphologies may create niche opportunities for plant-associated species, alter the foraging success of natural enemies, or create enemy-free space for herbivores [24]. Considered ‘expert manipulators’ of sieve elements, phytoplasma cause marked shifts in hormone balances, energy flows and phloem content [25,26], and could thus affect the nutritional ecology of phloem-feeders such as aphids, scales or mealybugs [27]. Despite the association of phytoplasma with several economically-important diseases, these pathosystems have remained critically under-researched [28]. One particular knowledge gap concerns the extent to which individual herbivore species or arthropod communities are influenced by phytoplasma-mediated alterations in plant phenotype [23,29].

Much of the past work on cross-kingdom interactions has not deliberately focused on non-native versus endemic organisms, or contrasted the response of antagonists of varying levels of dietary specialization. Nevertheless, non-native phytopathogens can have dramatic effects on food webs, and can facilitate the spread of invading arthropods [30,31]. Also, pathogen-mediated changes in host plant quality can differentially affect development and performance of specialist and generalist herbivores. Through the ‘tri-trophic interactions hypothesis’ (TTI), specialists are predicted to be more dominant than generalists and experience higher evolutionary success on low-quality plants, with plant quality and palatability greatly increased by pathogen co-infection [32]. To our knowledge, no research has been conducted on the extent to which a specific phytopathogen shapes relative success ratios of invasive herbivores of differing dietary specialization, and their associated trophic communities.

We tested the TTI hypothesis through observational studies in a tropical agro-ecosystem, using the unique case of a semi-perennial host plant that is concurrently attacked by a non-native systemic plant pathogen and two non-native phloem-feeders. More specifically, we assessed performance of two invasive mealybugs in cassava (Manihot esculenta); a tropical root crop extensively grown by smallholder farmers throughout Southeast Asia. In recent years, a number of non-native mealybug (Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae) species have colonized Asia’s cassava fields [33], including the specialist Phenacoccus manihoti Matile-Ferrero, a Neotropical parthenogenetic herbivore (9 recorded host species); and the generalist Paracoccus marginatus Williams & Granara de Willink, a Nearctic sexual herbivore (133 host genera). Invasion history is fairly similar for both species, with respective colonization of Asian cassava presumably initiated around 2008 and 2010 [34]. Biological control of both species has been attempted, with the encyrtids Anagyrus lopezi De Santis (for P. manihoti, released in 2009), and Acerophagus papayae Noyes & Schauff released against P. manihoti (2009) and P. marginatus (2010) respectively. Furthermore, cassava fields have been invaded by cassava witches broom (CWB) disease, an emerging pathogen associated with multiple strains of Candidatus Phytoplasma [33,35]. CWB-affected plants exhibit distinctive leaf discoloration, extensive proliferation of leaves and stems, and stunted growth.

We assessed the effect of CWB-infection on the abundance and diversity of mealybugs and their associated parasitoid communities. We focused on 3 research questions: (1) Does CWB infection affect the relative abundance of specialist versus generalist herbivores within the same feeding guild and insect family? (2) Does CWB phytoplasma infection alter the abundance and composition of parasitoid and hyperparasitoid assemblages, this affecting mealybug biological control? (3) Does phytoplasma infection create new habitat and species-specific niche opportunities for invasive species? We reveal how phytoplasma infection is shaping entire host x parasitoid communities in cassava fields, add understanding of phytoplasma-mediated ecological processes, and inform management interventions that benefit insect biological control in a different context.

12. Soil fertility regulates invasive herbivore performance and top-down control in tropical agroecosystems of Southeast Asia:
In terrestrial ecosystems, changes in soil nutrient availability, plant growth or natural enemies can generate important shifts in abundance of organisms at various trophic levels. In agroecosystems the performance of (invasive) herbivores and their impacts on crops is of particular concern. Scientists are presently challenged with making reliable inferences on invader success, natural enemy performance and efficacy of biological control, particularly in tropical agroecosystems. In this study, we assess how trophic regulatory forces (bottom-up vs. top down) influence the success of three globally important pests of cassava. We examine the mealybug species (Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae) of differing host breadth and invasion history: Phenacoccus manihoti, Paracoccus marginatus, and Pseudococcus jackbeardsleyi. Potted plant fertilizer trials were combined with a regional survey in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia of 65 cassava fields of similar size and age, but with varying soil fertility. Relative abundance of each mealybug invader was mapped along a soil fertility gradient, and contrasted with site-specific measures of parasitism. Potted plant trials revealed strong bottom-up effects for P. manihoti, such that impacts of nitrogen and potassium additions were propagated through to higher trophic levels and substantially boost development and fitness of its specialist parasitoid, Anagyrus lopezi (Hymenoptera: Encyrtidae). Field surveys indicate that mealybug performance is highly species-specific and context-dependent. For example, field-level abundance of P. jackbeardsleyi and P. marginatus, was related to measures of soil fertility parameters, soil texture and plant disease incidence. Furthermore, for P. manihoti, in-field abundance is equally associated with soil texture (i.e., silt content). Principal component analysis (PCA) and regression suggested that P. manihoti and P. marginatus are disproportionately favored in low-fertility conditions, while P. jackbeardsleyi prospers in settings with high organic carbon and phosphorus. Parasitism of P. manihoti by A. lopezi varied greatly with field and soil fertility conditions, and was highest in soils with intermediate fertility levels and where management practices include the addition of fertilizer supplements. Our characterization of the relative performance of invasive mealybugs and strength of parasitism across variable soil fertility conditions will help guide parasitoid release programs and soil management practices that enhance mealybug biological control.

13. Alternatives to land grabbing: exploring conditions for smallholder inclusion in agricultural commodity chains in Southeast Asia:
Smallholder engagement with export commodities in Southeast Asia potentially offers a more inclusive development pathway than large-scale plantation production, which has been associated with the phenomenon of land grabs. This raises three questions which we explore in this paper: What are the agro-economic factors favouring or obstructing smallholders relative to plantations? What are the incentives for agribusiness firms to contribute to smallholder production other than by direct control of land? Can smallholder production be broadly inclusive in the face of internal differentiation and encroachment by external investors? We compare smallholder involvement with four cash crops which have experienced strong market demand – rubber, oil palm, cassava and teak – based on fieldwork in six Southeast Asian countries. We conclude that smallholder production can be a viable and inclusive strategy, contingent on the case-by-case confluence of a number of key factors which we enumerate.

14. Coupling of pollination services and coffee suitability under climate change:
Climate change will cause geographic range shifts for pollinators and major crops, with global implications for food security and rural livelihoods. However, little is known about the potential for coupled impacts of climate change on pollinators and crops. Coffee production exemplifies this issue, because large losses in areas suitable for coffee production have been projected due to climate change and because coffee production is dependent on bee pollination. We modeled the potential distributions of coffee and coffee pollinators under current and future climates in Latin America to understand whether future coffee-suitable areas will also be suitable for pollinators. Our results suggest that coffee-suitable areas will be reduced 73–88% by 2050 across warming scenarios, a decline 46–76% greater than estimated by global assessments. Mean bee richness will decline 8–18% within future coffee-suitable areas, but all are predicted to contain at least 5 bee species, and 46–59% of future coffee-suitable areas will contain 10 or more species. In our models, coffee suitability and bee richness each increase (i.e., positive coupling) in 10–22% of future coffee-suitable areas. Diminished coffee suitability and bee richness (i.e., negative coupling), however, occur in 34–51% of other areas. Finally, in 31–33% of the future coffee distribution areas, bee richness decreases and coffee suitability increases. Assessing coupled effects of climate change on crop suitability and pollination can help target appropriate management practices, including forest conservation, shade adjustment, crop rotation, or status quo, in different regions.

15. On-farm diversity offsets environmental pressures in tropical agro-ecosystems: A synthetic review for cassava-based systems:
Ecosystem integrity is at risk across the tropics. In the quest to meet global dietary and market demands, tropical agro-ecosystems face unrelenting agricultural intensification and expansion. Agro-biodiversity can improve ecosystem stability and functioning, but its promotion in smallholder-based systems faces numerous practical hurdles. In the tropics, cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) is cultivated on over 25 million hectares and features as the third most important source of calories. Cassava crops are often maintained by resource-poor farmers who operate on marginal lands, at the fringes of sensitive, biodiverse habitats. As traditional intercropping schemes are gradually abandoned, monoculture cassava systems face stagnating yields, resource-use inefficiencies and agro-ecosystem degradation. A global literature search identified 189 cassava intercropping studies, covering 330 separate instances of intercropping systems. We employed a vote-counting approach and simple comparative measure across a subset of 95 studies to document the extent to which intercropping sustains a bundle of ecosystem services. Across geographies and biophysical conditions, a broad range of intercrops provided largely positive effects on five key ecosystem services: pest suppression, disease control, land equivalency ratio (LER), and soil and water-related services. Ecosystem services were augmented through the addition of a diverse range of companion crops. Results indicated 25 positive impacts vs. 3 negative impacts with the addition of maize, 5 vs. 1 with gramineous crops, 23 vs. 3 with four species of grain legumes, and 9 vs. 0 with trees. Appropriate intercropping systems can help to strike a balance between farm-level productivity, crop resilience, and environmental health. Our work highlights an urgent need for interdisciplinary research and systems-level approaches to identify intensification scenarios in which crop productivity, provision of ecosystem services, biodiversity conservation, and human well-being are all balanced.

16. Integrating market chain assessments with zoonoses risk analysis in two cross-border pig value chains in Lao PDR:
Objective
Lao PDR’s recent accession to the World Trade Organization necessitates a greater understanding of the patterns and risk of livestock production in order to better align national policy with the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures. This eco-health study was conducted to improve understanding of the interrelations between market chains and zoonotic infection risks at two strategic cross border points between Lao PDR, Thailand and Viet Nam.
Methods
Information gained from smallholder farmer/trader interviews was integrated with serological surveys for pig-associated zoonoses—including hepatitis E virus (HEV), Taenia solium (T. solium) and trichinella—to identify potential linkages between disease risk and pig production and slaughter in low input systems common across the country.
Results
Trichinella and HEV exposure was high in both humans and pigs in both study areas, significantly associated with pig slaughter and the subsequent consumption and handling of raw pork products. T. solium demonstrated a strong geographical and ethnic association with the northern study area bordering Vietnam. With the right knowledge and accessible, affordable inputs, the majority of smallholder farmers indicated a willingness to invest more in pig production, which could simultaneously improve livelihoods and decrease exposure to HEV, Trichinella, and T. solium through increased access to formal markets and an improved slaughter processes.
Conclusion
The linkages identified when assessing disease risk in the context of potential economic and cultural drivers of transmission highlight the importance of a systems-based approach for the detection and control of zoonotic disease, and contributes to an improved understanding of the Lao PDR livestock sector.
Livestock movement pathways in Southeast Asia’s Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS) are highly dynamic, with significant changes in livestock volume and direction occurring in relatively short periods of time. Despite recent improvements in transnational dialogue to manage and strengthen GMS cross-border trade issues [1], the generally poor management of livestock disease by smallholder farmers, coupled with the fact that many cross border pathways remain unrecognised by country officials, remains an ongoing challenge to regional biosecurity [2,3].
Bordered by five countries in the GMS, Lao PDR is both an importer and significant ‘transit country’ for livestock such as cattle, buffalo and pigs moving between larger markets in Thailand, China and Vietnam [4]. Strong market-pull from neighbouring Vietnam and China provides unprecedented opportunities for local pig production in this small country, however despite recent increases, local pork production still remains insufficient for larger population centres such as Vientiane and Luang Prabang. For example, an estimated 40% of pigs consumed in Luang Prabang province are from Xayaboury province, often originating in Thailand [3]. Despite 25 official border control points, the porous nature of Lao PDR’s borders—many of which consist of overland tracks in mountainous regions that have been used for generations—has the potential to negatively impact on the livestock disease control and risk management in the country.
The 2013 accession of Lao PDR to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) necessitates enhanced compliance with the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement); the driving framework for international requirements regarding the protection of animal, human and plant health [5]. Despite a number of positive steps—including establishment of the Lao PDR Trade Portal and revision of trade-related legislation [6]—there remains a requirement for greater risk-based management of unsafe food items derived from animal products [7]. The research reported here implements a transdisciplinary approach to better understand the risks of porcine foodborne zoonoses such as trichinella, Taenia solium (T. solium), and hepatitis E virus (HEV), which have been identified in earlier studies as problematic [8–10] in the context of current and potential future market chains and smallholder farmer behaviour.
